What do you think was the role of NASA in bringing
planetary astronomy back from the dead? Well, I
think NASA is essentially the mother of modern
planetary astronomy slash planetary science.
And I believe this story as accurately. and well
told in Joe Tatarevich's book on the subject. I've
read that, and I think he makes a very convincing
case that we modern NASA or modern planetary
scientists really owe the formation of this
entire discipline in its present state to the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
We also owe NASA our current degree of extreme
frustration in the difficulty that we have in
doing our business, in promoting our profession,
and in keeping ourselves alive. I guess
essentially your entire career has been
supported by NSA money. Oh, yes. Absolutely. I
was, as I say, worked for Kuiper as a summer student
and then as a graduate student on NASA money. I was
kept with student deferments from the Vietnam War
because I was working in a university on NASA
support ever since. And now, of course, I'm a NASA
employee. How do you think NASA has managed this? I
mean, have they understood what's going on in
planetary astronomy? Or have they tried to
overmanage, micromanage, whatever? Or have they
done a reasonably good job? Well, they've done all
of those things because they've tried it all ways.
And in many respects, it has been done very well.
The main problem, I think, is that because modern
planetary science is a child of NASA and
government funding, it has not found its way in
fully legitimate ways into American academic
circles. There are not enough planetary science
positions in faculties in the universities in the
United States. And this leaves planetary
scientists in a very, very vulnerable position.
NASA, I think, has made minor and relatively
ineffective efforts to put planetary science in
legitimate academic institutions around the
country. But it could have done and should have
done and must do much more. That is the real
weakness in planetary science now, I think, is
that as the government funding waxes and wanes,
there is no adequate buffer in the American
academic institutions to keep planetary science
moderately comfortable. Do you think planetary
astronomy is part of astronomy? Planetary
astronomy, I think, is and should be considered
part of astronomy. There
was a time when I was less sure of that, maybe 10
years ago. But the reason I'm adamant about it now
is that it's clear to me that Classical astronomy
is moving toward the understanding of the
formation and development of planetary systems
in general, and ours in particular. And at the same
time, people with their training in planetary
astronomy and planetary science are becoming
more and more aware of the connection to the
interstellar medium and the material that is
formed there and incorporated into our solar
system. When we hold in our hands, for example, a
carbonaceous meteorite, we are holding
pre-solar material, material which is preserved
largely intact from its formation and chemical
evolution in the interstellar medium. So there is
a very natural connection in terms of materials
that we can study, objects that we can look at
between planetary astronomy studies of our solar
system and studies of the interstellar medium.
Sorry, Gene, to get into the Sorry to interrupt it
yesterday when they were trying to take your
picture. But you, I just told Dale here, in the
drawing, I got a piece of Allende. Lucky dog. I saw
it come in. Ed Barker and I were observing on the
82-inch. It was a lot of serious. He was standing on
the catwalk, and I was down the road. In Texas?
Yeah. At McDonald's. And you talk about the
ignorant peasants being scared. That thing, it
was a coup d'etat run, you know, Brighton. The moon
was just two days past full. That wiped it out. And
you could see the smoke. It was like a crude oil tank
blowing up. And I ran up to Ed and I said, it's got to
be a carbonaceous chondrite. I mean, he's right
here. You can ask him. I said that. But it looked
like the Hindenburg going up, which was my first
reaction. And so I got a piece of it. And I don't know
who to tell except you characters. Who would
appreciate that? Do you mind if you can do your
stuff and we'll just talk over here? Sure. Just
finishing up an interview.
In the old days, there wasn't any Icarus. There
wasn't any division for planetary sciences. And
now planetary astronomers in this country have
their own society and their own journal. You think
that's good or bad? Well, I think it's good. On the
one hand, it has provided a medium for us to publish
all the kinds of things that we do. There is, of
course, a downside to it. And a quick illustrative
point might be useful. At the time that radio
astronomy was developing as a kind of a separate
discipline, there was some discussion as to
whether or not the radio astronomers should have
their own journal. And Otto Struve, I believe, was
the vociferous proponent of not having a separate
journal and keeping astrophysics unified
through the astrophysical journal principally
and the astronomical journal, whether the
results come from the radio part of the spectrum or
the optical infrared part of the spectrum. So
that's a voice in favor of keeping things
together. because, and this is now a personal
view, because of the animosity or the
ambivalence, let's soften it a bit too, that we've
already talked about between classical
astronomers and planetary scientists, there has
developed a kind of set of different standards to
which research papers should be held for
publication. And I think that if If the
Astrophysical Journal were the only medium for
the publication of planetary science papers, we
would have a lot of problems getting some of our
work published. Not because it's intrinsically
inferior in quality, but because it's different.
And some of our standards are a bit different. Some
of them are fully as rigorous as those to which
classical astrophysicists hold their work.
Certainly superior in cosmology. Perhaps, yes, I
think so. found myself apologetic about the
quality of spectra that I've published and
interpreted from time to time. And then I
occasionally see what my astrophysics
colleagues are doing, and I feel less apologetic.
What do you think was the impact of the fact that we
have found no evidence for life anywhere else in
the solar system? Do you think that's really hurt
funding, in particular Mars? Oh, I don't think
funding has been hurt by by the lack of funding life
elsewhere. That seems to me to be quite a separate
activity, endeavor, quite a separate
philosophical issue to planetary science or to
pure science. I've become more and more aware in
just the last few years that so much science policy
in the United States is politically driven,
motivated, and controlled that it's almost
independent of the scientific merit of projects
that we're trying to do. This is certainly true of
big science projects, such as planetary
exploration programs, and most recently, the
program for the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence, which is such a politically
charged issue. And which has been funded out of
existence, I guess, this year. In just recent
weeks, has been funded out of existence, at least
at the moment. But you see that that political wind
can change directions very quickly and may again.
What do you think the public thinks about
planetary astronomy? Planetary astronomy in the
public's view, I think, is a productive and
exciting endeavor. It's gotten a lot of press.
It's highly amenable to promotion by exciting
results and pictures to go with it. And it, in many
ways, is the connection point between the public
and astronomical science. It seems to me that, as a
former teacher and as a person who talks publicly
about science quite a bit, that the public has two
points of connection with astronomy. One is, what
is a black hole, which is a question that comes up at
nearly every contact with a layperson. What are
the planets made out of, or some other question of
comparable interest specifically to solar
system things? And I'd like to punctuate that by
noting that projects which are primarily
classical astrophysics in nature, such as the
Hubble Space Telescope, get a tremendous amount
of mileage out of their photographs of the
planets. And I think that's just fine. I wish our
astrophysics colleagues would acknowledge the
value of planetary science, if only for its PR
value in that respect. That brings up a point that
Oren Nix, who's a co-investigator on this, made in
his book, Far Travelers. It was something that I
saw when I was at headquarters. that the, quote,
real, unquote, scientists did not want any
pictures, the theory being that if you could
actually look at something and see right there
that it wasn't real science. Did you get that
impression? Well, maybe so. Maybe so. I'll
go back to the issue of the composition of the
surface of Triton and our detection of methane and
nitrogen. The detection of those chemicals on
Triton's surface was accomplished essentially
at the time that Voyager was launched in the late
70s, 1977. And only over the next several years did
it become apparent that Voyager was actually
going to go to Triton and have a look at this object
that I'd been straining my eyes and telescopes to
see for all those years and to get an up-close look.
Now, I had pretty much concluded to my
satisfaction and the satisfaction of the other
very few colleagues interested in the subject of
what Triton's surface would look like when we got
there. But to then enjoy the extreme thrill of
seeing it up close in my own lifetime, while it was
still a topic of scientific interest and
importance to me, was just about unparalleled. it
did not, by having pictures of the surface of this
object, decrease or diminish its interest to me or
to my colleagues in the slightest way. And as I
indicated, we've continued to observe this
thing, even though we know in detail what its
surface looks like, we've continued to observe it
with ground-based telescopes where it remains an
unresolved, faint, distant, cold point of light.
Now, how that attitude persists with classical
astrophysicists who now can see deep into the core
of M31 with HST or deep into the cores of jetting
galaxies and other objects of interest to
astrophysicists? I don't know. I would hope that
they haven't lost their interest and excitement
in an object just because they can see it better.
What kind of a job do you think planetary
astronomers have done of selling themselves to
the public and to the Congress? Planetary
astronomers have not dealt well with Congress, in
part because we are naive academics by nature and
feel that politics and politicians are to be held
at arm's distance. And it's only been in the last 10
years that we as a profession have become aware of
the necessity to deal with political people and
political issues because we are a creation of a
political entity. namely the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, and are
totally dependent on government funding. People
in the Congress have told us how naive we are and how
aloof we have appeared to be, on the one hand,
depending on the Congress and public funding for
our support of our expensive hobbies, and on the
other hand, being unwilling to deal with
politicians in a real way. So planetary
scientists have grown up a bit, I think, in the last
decade or decade and a half through the necessity
of having to deal with politics and politicians.
So that's probably to the good. It isn't any fun.
And I particularly don't like it. But it seems to be
a fact of life. I don't think we do it very
effectively yet. In terms of dealing with the
public, I think we've done quite well. The Voyager
missions and all the press that was attendant to
those flybys, half a dozen of them, was a great
experience, a great positive experience.
Pictures of the planets from Voyager appeared on
the covers of national news magazines around the
world. Planetary scientists were interviewed. I
was interviewed. And David Morrison and I, at the
time that Pioneer went by Saturn, held what I think
is the world's only and certainly the first press
conference devoted entirely to Saturn satellite
Iapetus. And so the public has gotten a dose of some
rather arcane science through the successes of
Voyager and Pioneer and Viking, of course, and
Galileo. And we hope that that sequence will
continue. I think we've done well with the public,
not so well with the politicians. There's been a
lot of attention in the past few years to making
planetary astronomy a practical science. And
there's been a lot of publicity, certainly, about
killer asteroids, ozone hole, global warming,
search for extraterrestrial intelligence. I
suppose that's good for getting money. But do you
think it's been overdone a bit? Well, I'm not sure
it has been overdone. No, I don't think it has yet.
And I'm not sure that there's any expectation that
it will be overdone. There is, of course, some
concern about returning to the thrilling days of
yesteryear when planetary science had a crazy
element, or at least a perceived crazy element,
namely the diversable lowell types. And that
could happen again if the crazies really did get a
hold of these various topics.
Planetary scientists have done a pretty good job
of keeping that from happening. the issue of
impacts on the Earth from comments and and so on has
been promoted, discussed and embellished by
genuine scientists. Eugene Shoemaker, David
Morrison, Clark Chapman and various other people
have been writing at the popular level and
testifying before Congress and dealing with NASA
committees in a very professional way. And this, I
think, is what's keeping it from going going crazy
in the city era. are into things. We have Jill
Tarter, we have Frank Drake, we have Carl Sagan,
all of whom are respected, very legitimate
scientists dealing with these issues. And if we
can keep it on that plane, I think we can keep it
under control. What do you think the state of
planetary astronomy is now? Going up, going down,
hanging in there? Well, the state of planetary
astronomy now here in the beginning of fiscal year
94 is continuing to decline in terms of of the
availability of public money for it. The National
Science Foundation supports it at a very, very low
level. And may not continue. And may not continue.
NASA funding for planetary science is under
continual attack and pressure, let's say,
because of the cost of other NASA programs. Yet the
population of planetary scientists continues to
increase. and that's evidenced by the increased
attendance at the Division for Planetary
Sciences meetings held every year. And the
quality of the work that comes out of those
meetings continues to go up, and young people are
continually attracted to this field, in spite of
the fact that the funding pressure and the
pressure for other resources continues to grow.
So it's a peculiar situation, and I think that the
reason that the interest in it continues to grow is
because of its intrinsic value, its intrinsic
interest, and its intrinsic relevance to
understanding the Earth as a planet. Somebody's
getting their bachelor's degree, and they're
interested in planetary astronomy. What do you
say to them? I say that your prospects for getting a
job and support are not particularly good, but if
you are driven to do this, for the same reasons that
I was driven as a 13- or 14-year-old kid to do it,
then go ahead. Give it your best shot. Well, that
was actually the situation for astronomy in
general when we were undergraduates. That's
right, in a way. We were not encouraged to go into
astronomy because there was any sense of
lucrative employment or even a guarantee of any
job or anything of the kind. And information
distributed to random inquirers by the American
Astronomical Society when I was a kid said such
things as, there is very little room in astronomy
for people of marginal ability. And that's
probably still true. I consider myself a person of
marginal ability. But I had super marginal
persistence and dedication. And I had to become an
astronomer. And so I did. And I've been able to do it
reasonably successfully. Before there was even
an NSA. Before there was, yes. And so I would tell a
person in the situation you just described that if
you have to do this, then you have to do it. And
somehow you and the rest of us will find a way. And so
when I find such a person with that kind of
dedication and devotion, I do my very best to make
them feel welcome in this profession, to help
them. both professionally and at the technical
level, and try to get them involved, because
that's where the discoveries will come from, is
the people who are driven to do it. The death of the
Mars Observer Probe, to me at least, seemed to come
as a shock to a lot of people that have been in this
field for only 10 or 20 years. We both remember when
failures of planetary and lunar probes were the
norm rather than the exception. Do you think this
is a a good slap in the face to wake some people up?
Well, in a way, it's a slap in the face in many
respects. Or a dash of cold water. A dash of cold
water. It certainly shows that one can't be
sanguine about the successes from complicated,
expensive space probes. It's probably Vikings
kind of work. Yes, it is. I think people got fat and
happy. Yes, we did. One of the most serious
elements of this now, of course, is that there are
very few other spacecraft programs that are
flying or expected to fly in a reasonable amount of
time, whereas in the 70s and 80s there were
programs under development more or less
continuously, and at least the prospect of flying
was not too remote or too distant. young people
coming into the field. And also, we were going to
planets that were relatively close by and didn't
take forever to get there. So the situation is
different now in that a person who has just been
terminated in a funding sense by the failure of
Mars Observer doesn't necessarily have any
prospects on the immediate horizon to pick them up
and to keep them actively employed and
scientifically productive in the intervening
years. That's a very serious problem because some
of these people will be forced to drift away into
other fields just because of the lack of support.
There is no buffer program which can pick them up.
This is a leading question and it calls for a
personal answer. I have heard it said at DPS
meetings that we need planetary probes to keep the
scientists interested. My theory feeling always
was that if the scientists were supposed to
generate the interest themselves, whether they
have probes or not. Your comments? Well, I tend to
feel, as I think you do, that the intrinsic merit of
this science will generate the interest on the
part of people truly devoted to planetary
studies, independent of the probes. The probes
provide the Very, very important. Stuff that we
otherwise couldn't get at all. Things that we
cannot do in any other way, that's true. But we've
already seen just a few days ago that work from
essentially images of Mars from the distance of
the Earth can be taken in the proper way, in this
case with the Hubble Space Telescope, but also
from the ground, can still produce important
science, despite the fact that we've been to Mars
with a number of orbiters and two landers from the
United States and so on. So there's still a lot of
work that can be done on the planets, but some of it
simply cannot be done without probes.
Nonetheless, there are many compelling
planetary problems that will keep real
scientists interested indefinitely into the
future, even if there is never another planetary
probe. The field will shrink, of course, and there
will be a smaller number of people doing it. But the
people who are driven to understand The solar
system, its nature, and its relationship to other
systems of stars and dust and things in our galaxy
and elsewhere will do this work no matter what. One
last and leading question. I was going to say, what
do you think, in the last 30 years, the greatest
development in planetary astronomy has been? But
I'm reminded of the fact that when we were
students, there were the gas giants, and then
there were the terrestrial planets. And we didn't
realize there's a whole different kind of planet,
you know, the ice planets and all that sort of
stuff. Do you think that is the most important
thing we found out, or do you have your particular
candidate? Well, I think it's very important that
we've discovered that each planet is its own kind,
and that there is this vast collection of icy
bodies in the outer solar system But I'm inclined
to think that the most important realization is a
picture that's still evolving and emerging, and a
picture to which not all planetary scientists
have yet signed up. And that is our connection to
interstellar space, to other material elsewhere
in the galaxy. I'm particularly impressed by the
detection of organic material in the solar
system, even in the inner solar system, that
clearly had its origins on the grains of
interstellar dust among the stars in the diffuse
interstellar medium. This material, some of it
has come into the solar system relatively
unaltered, and we're just beginning to detect and
understand that. Other of that material has been
highly altered, and we are some of that stuff.